The Indian Penal Code,1860
Council of the Governor General of India
Citation:- Act No. 45 of 1860
Territorial extent:- India (except the state of Jammu and Kashmir)
Enacted by:- Legislative Council
Date enacted:- 6 October 1860
Date assented to:- 6 October 1860
Date commenced:- 1 January 1862
Committee report:- First Law Commission
Related legislation
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
Status: Substantially amended
The Indian Penal Code (IPC) is the main criminal code of India. 
It is a comprehensive code intended to cover all substantive aspects of criminal law. 
It came into force in British India during the early British Raj period in 1862.
However, it did not apply automatically in the Princely states, which had their own courts and legal systems until the 1940s.
The Code has since been amended several times and is now supplemented by other criminal provisions.
After the partition of the British Indian Empire, the Indian Penal Code was inherited by its successor states.
The Dominion of India and the Dominion of Pakistan,
where it continues independently as the Pakistan Penal Code.
The Ranbir Penal Code (RPC) applicable in Jammu and Kashmir is also based on this Code.
The code continued in force there.
The Code was also adopted by the British colonial authorities in Colonial Burma, Ceylon, the Straits Settlements ect.


Objective:-
The objective of this Act is to provide a general penal code for India. Though not an initial objective, 
the Act does not repeal the penal laws which were in force at the time of coming into force in India. 
This was so because the Code does not contain all the offences and it was possible that some offences might have still been left out of the Code, 
which were not intended to be exempted from penal consequences. 
Though this Code consolidates the whole of the law on the subject and is exhaustive on the matters in respect of which it declares the law, 
many more penal statutes governing various offences have been created in addition to the code.

